  https://planergy.com/blog/accounts-payable-cycle/
1 / 16Simplifying The Accounts Payable
Process
KEY TAKEAWAYS
The accounts payable (AP) process begins when an invoice is received and
ends when that invoice has been paid
Manual AP processes can incur significant time and labor costs for any
organization
Automating the AP process using software creates significant benefits and
simplifies the process
AP automation improves processing times across the invoice lifecycle by
300%
The accounts payable process can be a cost-center or a value-driver, depending
on how an organization approaches it. To capture the benefits of the accounts  https://planergy.com/blog/accounts-payable-cycle/
2 / 16payable process and cut down on labor-intensive costs, automation is key.
In this article, we’ll dive into what the accounts payable process is, how it works,
and how automation can help organizations derive value from it.
What Is Accounts Payable?
Accounts payable (AP) is the department in a company that’s responsible for
paying for the goods and services that the company purchases.
The AP department’s main focus is to ensure that vendors and creditors get paid
in a timely manner while maintaining good cash flow for the company. AP teams
generally do not focus on purchasing but on making payments.
The accounts payable cycle includes:
Receiving and processing invoices from suppliers
Matching invoices against purchase orders and receipts to ensure they
are correct.
Approving invoices or sending them back to vendors with more questions.
Making payments via the vendor’s preferred method, whether that be
wire, direct deposit, or paper checks.
Setting up payment plans when necessary and ensuring installments are
paid on time.
What Is the Difference Between Accounts
Payable and Accounts Receivable?
Accounts payable and accounts receivable sound related and they are, but they
are in some ways exact opposite workflows. That’s because one department is
responsible for payments going out, and the other is responsible for payments  https://planergy.com/blog/accounts-payable-cycle/
3 / 16coming in.
Accounts payable is responsible for vendor payments, paying creditors, and
paying other organizations that a company purchases goods and services from or
owes money to.
Accounts receivable is responsible for inbound payments that the company
collects for goods and services they provide, which is in a way the opposite of
accounts payable.
In order to not get them confused, just remember that accounts payable (AP) is
payments going out, while accounts receivable (AR) is payments coming in. For
more on the differences and similarities, read our article on accounts payable vs
accounts receivable .
What Is the Accounts Payable Process?
When issuing a payment, the accounts payable team goes through a process to
ensure that payments are accurate and made on time. The accounts payable
process includes the following steps:
Invoice Is Received1.
Invoices may arrive in many different forms: fax, email, mail, or through
an invoicing software system. Without a process in place, invoices may be
delivered to the wrong people, requiring extra work for the invoice to get
approved and paid.
Invoice Assigned for Processing2.
After an invoice is received, it is forwarded to an appropriate person,  https://planergy.com/blog/accounts-payable-cycle/
4 / 16either a department manager, the company accountant, or an accounts
payable specialist. If a company is clear on its purchase order about who
should receive the invoice, this step can be avoided.
AP automation software  can automatically receive, process, and assign
invoices to the right people.
Invoice Entered Into the Accounting System3.
The invoice data is then typed into the company’s accounting system, and
the document may be scanned and saved. This step can also be automated
using AP automation software, which can reduce the risk of double-entry.
Invoice Approval Process4.
The approval process includes verifying that the expense was initially
approved by matching with the purchase order (PO), the complete
shipment arrived and/or services were provided, and that the invoice is
not a duplicate and already paid.
It can be time-consuming to track down all the details for every invoice,
but if your AP software integrates with upstream procurement data, as
Planergy does, you can automate much of the process. This also helps to
ensure payments are made early enough to capture early payment
discounts—creating a positive effect on the balance sheet.
Payment5.
Once a series of vendor invoices are verified and approved, most
companies will run a batch of payments. These can be either through
paper checks sent in the mail, via ACH direct deposit  (in the US only), or  https://planergy.com/blog/accounts-payable-cycle/
5 / 16through wire transfers.
What Is the 3-Way Match Process in
Accounts Payable?
Accounts payable teams use the three-way match process  to ensure that they only
pay invoices for the correct items and amounts. In 3-way matching, three
documents (purchase order, orders receipt/goods receipt note, and invoice) are
compared to each other to ensure that the quantity and price are correct.
If all three documents match, then the invoice is paid. If there is a discrepancy,
the accounts payable team can send the invoice back to get their questions
answered by the supplier.  https://planergy.com/blog/accounts-payable-cycle/
6 / 16
There are some pros and cons to the 3-way match process. The pros are that it
ensures that payments are made only for the correct amount and that it can help
accounts payable teams from making duplicate payments. The cons come mostly
from doing this process manually.
Manually comparing receipts, purchase orders, and invoices either on paper or
through a computer screen can be time-consuming and costly to pull off.
Accounts payable automation software can streamline this process so that all the
documents are automatically pulled and compared. Humans can verify that the
matches are correct, but the software does the bulk of the tedious work.
What Are the Challenges Facing Accounts
Payable?
Just like with 3-way matching, the majority of challenges accounts payable teams
face comes from doing things manually. Doing things the hard way costs AP  https://planergy.com/blog/accounts-payable-cycle/
7 / 16teams a lot of time and money, which can be avoided through software.
Manual processes require AP professionals to manage the tasks by hand—filing
paper documents, manual data entry, and matching numbers line by line to
ensure the PO matches the invoice and delivery. These are costly and outdated
ways to get things done, and they’re prone to human error and lack of oversight.
Manual approval processes with multiple approvers involved can also weigh
accounts payable teams down. Waiting on approvers to reply to emails and sign
papers becomes a liability for late payments. Even with gentle reminders, the
payment process takes so long that AP teams cannot qualify for any early
payment discounts  that vendors offer (and may incur late fees).
The approval delays are often caused by a lack of visibility of upstream data, an
end-to-end AP software that covers 3-way matching ensures approvers can review
relevant detail and approve faster. It can also reduce the number of approvers
you  may  want  to  include,  especially  when  a  3-way  match  is  completed
successfully.
On top of that, any increase in volume can overload a manual AP process due to
the amount of labor time and detail to complete the work. This results in data
entry errors, invoice matching errors, and lost opportunities for early payment
discounts.
How Can You Streamline the Accounts
Payable  Process?  The  Benefits  of
Automation.
For teams to streamline the accounts payable process, automation is key.
2020 research  conducted by Ardent Partners found just 24.2% of invoices were  https://planergy.com/blog/accounts-payable-cycle/
8 / 16being processed straight through. AP automation improves processing times
across the invoice lifecycle by 300%; the attendant gains in speed, accuracy, and
transparency translate to invoice processing costs that are six times lower than
those relying on manual AP.
With AP automation software, the second an invoice is received is when the
automation begins. A program checks each line item against the PO and the
receiving information to ensure that the goods and services ordered are the same
as the items received and billed. If an error is found, an alert is sent to the
accounts payable department for verification.
With a pre-populated list of vendors, items, pricing, and payment terms in the
system, the process requires minimal input from start to finish. Automation helps
businesses  minimize  exceptions,  improve  invoice  reconciliations ,  streamline
accruals ,  and  generate  accurate,  up-to-date  financial  statements  when  needed.
The benefits for businesses who switch from manual processes to AP automation
are numerous:
Improved accounts payable governance
Streamlined processes
Increased productivity (more work with fewer employees)
Accelerated invoice processing and timely payments
Minimized risks associated with routine invoice payments
Strengthened vendor relationships
Better  negotiating  position  (due  to  improved  oversight  and  earlier
payments)
Integrating AP with ERP and accounting software
Improved collaboration with the procurement and purchasing department
The ability to assign GL codes and tax rates automatically, which benefits
the accounting process as well as payment processing  https://planergy.com/blog/accounts-payable-cycle/
9 / 16
Following accounts payable best practices with an automated accounts payable
system helps businesses stay within budget and maintain cash flow. Spend
reporting tools give businesses the power to make informed decisions based on
accurate  metrics.  This  can  prevent  leaks,  maverick  spending ,  fraud ,  and
overpayment  errors  (while  ensuring  due  dates  aren’t  missed).
The Automated Accounts Payable Process:
Three Steps
Unlike  the  five-step  manual  accounts  payable  process  outlined  above,  the
automated process is reduced to just three steps:  https://planergy.com/blog/accounts-payable-cycle/
10 / 16Receive an Invoice1.
Using an AP automation system, invoices can be received digitally and
automatically inputted into the system. Alternatively, paper invoices or
those emailed outside of the system can be quickly uploaded.
Invoice Data Extraction2.
Automated systems scan and extract all data from the invoice and
instantly  match  that  data  against  the  relevant  PO  and  receiving
documents  to  ensure  accurate  pricing  and  quantity.
Invoice processing3.
Once confirmed for accuracy, invoices are then automatically processed
for payment. This process can be reviewed manually or be done
completely automatically for smaller payments or payments to trusted
suppliers.
The automated accounts payable process drastically reduces the amount
of time and money spent on processing invoices. It also ensures higher
levels of accuracy and reduces the number of incorrect invoices paid.  https://planergy.com/blog/accounts-payable-cycle/
11 / 16
With AP automation software, the second an invoice is received is when the
automation begins. Invoice processing costs are six times lower in automated
AP systems.
What  Are  Best  Practices  in  Accounts
Payable Processing?
Following best practices in accounts payable  can help ensure that bills are paid
on time and without incurring unnecessary costs. While every organization
requires a customized accounts payable process to meet its unique needs, here
are nine general best practices:
Centralize the Accounts Payable Process1.
All AP data and processes should go through a single system with a
shared database. This makes it easier for every department to adhere to  https://planergy.com/blog/accounts-payable-cycle/
12 / 16protocols, eliminates redundancy, and cuts down on processing time and
data entry mistakes.
Establish Paperless Processing2.
Businesses that switch to automated AP systems from paper-based
processes see numerous benefits such as more vendor transparency, more
access to discounts, reduced processing time, and fewer errors.
Set up Reminders for Payments3.
This enables businesses to avoid late or missed payments, take advantage
of discounts, and anticipate expenses.
Streamline Routine Payments4.
Implement accounts payable protocols to categorize and automatically
approve certain types of requests made by specified people to streamline
the approval process.
Set up Vendor Portals5.
Vendor portals allow vendors to track the status of deliveries, scheduling,
contract terms, and invoicing in your system without the need to talk to a
representative (so you save on time and labor costs while improving
vendor relations).
Automate Reporting6.
Organizations should have instant access to real-time accruals, budget,
and spend details. In the event of an audit, a budget meeting, or a request  https://planergy.com/blog/accounts-payable-cycle/
13 / 16from the board, an accounts payable team using an eProcurement
program should never have to scramble to produce a detailed report and
can even set up scheduled reports.
Implement 3-Way Matching7.
As covered in an earlier section, 3-way matching ensures that only valid,
accurate invoices are paid.
Digitally Archive Data8.
AP software makes digitally archiving records simple. At every step from
PO to payment, documents are attached to the transaction record. Saving
this documentation digitally allows teams to assess how well contract
terms were fulfilled and when payment was made. It also makes it much
easier to find documents and information for internal review or during
audits.
Manage Your Cash Flow9.
Knowing upcoming expenses is critical to maintaining a budget. An
automated accounts payable system helps ensure that there are no
surprises. Cash flow can be managed by scheduled outgoing payments for
when there is enough income to pay them. Build a cash reserve to fill gaps
when cash flow slows and bills are due.
Segregation of Duties10.
No single person should have complete control over a company’s ability to
make payments. This isn’t just a risk for fraud, but also a risk for human
error, as having just one person responsible for internal controls isn’t a  https://planergy.com/blog/accounts-payable-cycle/
14 / 16good idea. Separating duties and sharing responsibilities helps make sure
that companies only pay for the goods and services they ordered and
mitigates fraud risk.
AP Automation Is Part of a Larger Process
Despite its many advantages to manual AP systems, AP automation doesn’t solve
every problem. Even in automated systems, there can still be a lack of upstream
data to authorize payments and a lack of collaboration with procurement teams .
That’s why taking an end-to-end, full-cycle approach to the AP process , and
automating everything from start to finish (not just AP) can be more beneficial.
Organizations that include AP automation as part of their entire procure-to-pay
process—which includes procurement and purchasing as well as AP—take a
better approach to addressing challenges that affect the entire organization,  https://planergy.com/blog/accounts-payable-cycle/
15 / 16beyond just AP.
The most advanced organizations unite the procurement, purchasing, and AP
processes and enjoy the benefits of automation throughout each. Choosing
software that can effectively manage each of these processes together is key to
getting your organization there.
What’s your goal today?
1.  Use  Planergy  to  manage  purchasing  and  accounts
payable
We’ve helped save billions of dollars for our clients through better spend
management, process automation in purchasing and finance, and reducing
financial risks. To discover how we can help grow your business:
Read our case studies, client success stories, and testimonials.
Visit our Accounts Payable Automation Software  page to see how
Planergy can automate your AP process reducing you the hours of manual
processing, stoping erroneous payments, and driving value across your
organization.
Learn about us, and our long history of helping companies just like yours.
Book a Live Demo
2. Download our guide “Preparing Your AP Department For
The Future”
Download a free copy  of our guide to future proofing your accounts payable
department. You’ll also be subscribed to our email newsletter  and notified about
new articles or if have something interesting to share.  https://planergy.com/blog/accounts-payable-cycle/
16 / 16download a free copy of our guide
3. Learn best practices for purchasing, finance, and more
Browse hundreds of articles , containing an amazing number of useful tools,
techniques, and best practices. Many readers tell us they would have paid
consultants for the advice in these articles.
Related Posts